Hello everybody, my name is Anita Chen
and I work as a project manager at Fraunhofer Fokus in Berlin.
My lightning talk for this workshop will be about
using AI methodologies to predict
optimal video encoding ladders on the web.
slide-2
For this talk, I will first cover the basics of per-title encoding.
Next, I will introduce our web-based AI solution
for per-title/per-scene encoding.
Lastly, I will recap this presentation
as well as discuss next steps in this project.
slide-3
For the per-title encoding section,
I will provide a brief overview of per-title encoding,
its differences from other encoding methods,
as well as its advantages and disadvantages.
slide-4
In a standard encoding ladder,
bitrate/resolution pairs are fixed
and the same encoding settings are applied across all types of videos.
For example, with the Apple h264 encoding ladder,
a 1080p video would be encoded with 7800 kbit/s.
However, there are various types of content:
animation, nature documentaries, action/sports -
which either have low/high complexity,
as well as high/low redundancy,
and the same encoding ladder is applied to all videos.
As a result, bitrates are either under or overused,
which can result in increasing storage costs.
With per-title encoding, however,
encoding settings are based on the content itself.
With per-scene encoding, encoding settings are adjusted
based on different scenes within the content.
slide-5
So, how does per-title encoding work?
First, the source video file is analyzed for its complexity.
With the analysis, several test encodes are produced
to calculate its corresponding VMAF values.
These test encodes consist of different encoding settings.
Then, a convex hull is estimated,
so that the resulting encoding ladder consists of
bitrate/resolution pairs that lie close to the convex hull.
Finally, production encoding is performed,
where a video is encoded based on the resulting ladder.
For purposes of comparison, we used a 1080p sports video
and encoded it with 3 different methods.
In this context, the benchmark for quality comparisons are
VMAF and PSNR, both of which are quality metrics for video files.
VMAF was developed by Netflix a few years ago
in order to capture the perception of video quality
in a more accurate fashion.
It is measured on a scale of 0-100, with 100 being perfect quality.
On slide 10, you can see a comparison of bitrates and quality scores
between each type of encoding.
With per-title and per-scene encoding,
bitrates and bandwidth are reduced by at least 50%,
while maintaining the same quality without any perceptual loss.
Additionally, through comparing file sizes,
we found that storage and delivery also decreased by at least 50%.
However, a major disadvantage in this method is that
a large number of test encodes is required
in order to derive a proper/accurate encoding ladder.
slide-6
To overcome the challenges of per-title and per-scene encoding,
we developed a few models that can predict video quality
based on certain encoding settings.
With this technology, large sets of test encodings are not needed.
slide-7
As you can see on slides 7-8, we've developed a workflow
with integrated machine learning models
that can be adapted for per-title, per-scene and live encoding.
First, a source video is fed into the distribution workflow.
The source video's complexity is analyzed
(such as resolution size, frame rate, etc.).
A regression algorithm is used to predict
the optimized encoding profile, which is then applied
to the video for production encoding.
The encoded video can then be made available for playback streaming.
In a live streaming scenario,
5-second clips are cut and analyzed in parallel.
slide-8
Slide 8 presents the current and upcoming components
for our end-to-end solution.
The main goal in integrating web API’s is
to improve the performance and speed of our end-to-end solution
for several use case scenarios.
Our current web solution includes basic browser functionalities
and a video upload via the browser.
However, a more 'web-friendly' solution
for this step in the workflow
involves an automatic video upload via an URL.
Our current complexity analysis is conducted server-side.
All extracted video data is sent
to our machine learning models via an endpoint.
Like Francois' stated in his presentation,
“Media Processing Hooks Through the Web”,
videos are processed and analyzed through frame extraction,
which is also implemented for our video analysis component.
However, in our solution, the overall end-to-end solution becomes slower,
as well as increase costs on the server-side
when it comes to video analysis.
With that, a client-side analysis would improve
the overall time of our solution.
For our machine learning component,
the models are pre-trained and loaded in the browser
to produce client-side predictions.
However, with each model, comes several predictions
that must be filtered down in order to form
a proper optimal encoding ladder.
To overcome this issue, we've developed an encoding ladder API
in order to filter through the results,
and select the bitrate/resolution pairs that lie close to the convex hull.
We are currently looking into
the Web Neural Network and Model Loader API’s
to increase the performance of our models for use case scenarios
such as super resolution for larger company-wide conference calls,
our live streaming solution, and ultimately,
a faster andmore automated process for our models
in terms of generating predictions.
In the encoding/packaging component,
while our production encoding is done server-side,
integrating the WebCodecs API
for our live streaming townhall meetings
can also optimize the overall end-to-end solution.
slide-9
On slide 9, you’ll find screenshots of our web interface,
which follows our previously discussed workflow.
In the middle screenshot, you can see
our server-side video analysis taking place.
So, features such as the video metadata, characteristics,
classification, scene changes, and spatial/temporal information
are extracted and fed as requests for the machine learning endpoint.
Once analyzed, any of our pre-trained models can be selected
to determine its optimal encoding ladder,
which consists of the resolution, bitrate, and predicted VMAF score.
With this browser-based solution,
users can filter down the predictions
to certain encoding ladder representations,
and perform a production encoding on the selected representations.
slide-10
Slide 10 provides a brief overview of the models we’ve developed.
These models have been extensively trained on over 20 video attributes
and thousands of test encodes derived from videos ranging from 360p - 1080p.
As a result, we’ve developed 4 working models,
of which, XGBoost has been our best performing model in terms of accuracy.
We also have a convolutional neural network,
which is geared towards image & video processing,
as well as the feed forward and stacked model.
As mentioned in the GitHub issue of 'ML model formats',
it would be necessary to have standardized frameworks.
What we are currently looking into developing is
a serving pipeline that supports all of our models
so that separate instances do not have to be built for each framework.
While we tried to build all models under one framework,
certain models such as the XGBoost was not possible with Keras/Tensorflow.
slide-11
In this talk, we've covered the concept of per-title encoding
and a web/AI-based solution to automate the process
as well as save the time and storage
that usually follows the process of per-title encoding.
We've described a conventional static encoding ladder,
where the same encoding settings are applied across all videos.
Then, the per-title encoding method, where bitrates and storage are saved.
slide-12
With our AI-based solution, the large number of test encodes are avoided,
and bandwidth and storage costs are saved even more.
slide-13
We are currently optimizing the overall workflow
in order to have a faster performance time.
For example, enhancing our current architecture
with using the model loader API that can load a custom pre-trained model.
We’d also like to contribute to this API
and the model standardization issue
in order to further support our use cases.
We are also optimizing our machine learning models
in order to minimize the difference
between our predicted and production encodes
and exploring other types of metrics
that can further enhance our models.
slide-14
Thank you for watching my presentation and have a nice day!